Before we start after the podcast, we would like to say thank you to all of you who support the FSF East Work of Money.
Working for software freedom and producing podcasts costs money.
Please consider supporting us with the nation on the FSFE.org slash donate and in the show notes.
Bringing these people together also takes time.
It needs energy, finding, coming, crown.
See where we can work together.
This needs a lot of time.
Resources and yeah, if you donate to us, you make this work possible.
You make our fights for funding possible.
And then also one day we benefit you.
If you, for example, develop and maybe we get funds for your project in the future.
Hello and welcome to the software freedom podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowered users to take control of technology.
I'm body married and today I'm here with Alexander Sander.
Alex is the senior policy consultant for the FSFE.
And in his work for the FSFE, he monitors the current happenings in the European Union
and also pushes for the recognition of the software.
Yeah, today in this policy and EU episode, I don't know.
I find this is a tongue breaker, trying to understand.
They are called tanked.
So you know what I mean?
Alex and I will talk about our host and experience.
And especially the outcome of the two DevRooms that were on the FSFE.
Alex, thank you so much for making the time.
Thank you so much for being here on our second try for the recording.
Yeah, thanks for having me.
Okay, so how was the two DevRooms?
I remember they were not only run by the FSFE.
There were others involved as well.
So in the EU and policy DevRooms, who was involved again?
So we partnering on two DevRooms, the legal and policy DevRooms that we are
organizing together with other organizations like the Software Freedom Conservancy,
Red Hat, Tom Marble, something we started to work on together doing the corona crisis,
the DevRooms itself is longer than a decade.
And it's very well established, DevRooms where we talk about SNS, legal and policy,
related issues.
And this year, we obviously again talked a lot about the cyber resilience act,
a topic that keeps the first them or one could say the broader Free Software community,
discussing for pretty much two years, I think we started to discuss during the first
them, the cyber resilience act.
And since we are now facing the implementation, some very practical questions arise.
Which is important for us in particular for the FSFE.
There is a so-called Stewart role introduced in the cyber resilience act,
so there are manufacturers, Stewart and the basically one could say individual developers,
these three roles are somehow given.
And there are exemptions in particular for people that don't earn money with free software
or smaller projects, projects that are non-profit projects,
and here we discuss which role they might have in the cyber resilience act
and what application might arise for them.
And how we can, in particular, support stewards in the relationship as manufacturers,
so that in particular, non-profit work is not destroyed by the cyber resilience act,
but in more important, maybe even supported.
And that was a huge discussion we had together with Michael from the German BSI,
so the Bundesant for Sicherheit in the information station,
so basically the IT security agency for Germany,
which also most likely be the market surveillance authority.
For the cyber resilience act was there with me together on a session where we hosted,
yeah, basically a Q&A session on this Stewart question,
and I think that was very useful and intense discussion we had,
so we tried to address these issues,
but also listen to the community what they see, what their fears are,
and this ultimately will also end in a project that we run together with this German BSI,
this IT security agency,
where we precisely want to research on this question,
how the relationship between stewards and manufacturers will be,
so this first session could be also seen as a starting point to this research,
and I would also like to use this postcard episode to,
to kind of as a call, so basically if you are a Stewart,
or if you believe you might be a Stewart,
a few, three to reach out to me directly or to contact at FFE.org,
and we are working on a questionary which we want to share with manufacturers,
stewards and interested stakeholders,
and in order to come up with this question there where we want to address those questions,
we are looking for input, so if you should have some,
it's recommended to you to watch the Q&A session on this year,
from the first term,
and maybe reach out to us if you have some input in this direction for us.
How was the Q&A session, like how many people were there,
and how, what was your feeling from the questions that,
where are those, that are those Q&A session?
Because we are just a cyber-resilience act,
I believe this is the act that we discussed the most in the previous,
in the past year.
Yeah, it's definitely a huge discussion on going,
and that's basically good, but bad at the same time.
It's good since a lot of people take care of this very important topic.
The bad part is that there are some rumors and myths around the cyber-resilience act.
One of our tasks is to explain what's really in, what's not in.
However, there are still, as I said, many open questions
when it comes to implementation,
basically the needy-credi of transforming the sentences we have in the law,
into something which is working,
and I think it is important for the community to know
that there will be basically, in the end,
a market surveillance authority who is doing this,
and it's a good idea to talk to precisely this body,
and since they really can't have this rules on how they do it,
how they see all of this, how they implemented,
so I think it's important to learn that,
basically, it's the market surveillance authority who says,
this is a steward, and this steward now needs to fulfill these obligations.
So that's why it's a good idea to talk to them,
to listen what they have in mind,
and maybe to advocate if it's going in a wrong direction.
So that was basically, I think, a very important point
we made during this discussion,
and which helped the people, however,
so when it comes to the room,
we had one of these basically bigger lecture rooms.
It's very hard to guess how many people have been there,
so the room was pretty full,
and there was a huge interest in this topic,
so I'd say a few hundred, maybe,
but don't talk me on that,
so I'm pretty poor in counting people.
However, there was a huge interest,
and I think, from the questions that came,
it's also clear that there is still a lot of uncertainty
when it comes to M-I-N-S-Dewart,
and if I am a steward, what do I have to do?
And I have to feeling that some people in our community
are feeling the rules,
and that they think that, for example,
issue could be that some sort of
continuity agencies that don't have too much to do with open source,
want to be one of those stewards to earn money worth this,
and how to prevent this,
and I think there's also a lot of fear on the obligations
that stewards might have that there's too much bureaucracy in this,
and that they simply can't do it.
And these are precisely the points we also want to
bring to the market surveillance authority,
and for this I think it was also good.
That they have been there, and that they have seen,
like physically seeing how people are worried about this,
and that there is definitely needed to stay
and touch with these people to communicate with these people
to include them in the debate,
and to remove a bit of the fog,
which might be around this CIA,
because ultimately I think it has more chances than downsides,
if you play it right during this implementation.
And that's something I have to feeling that people understood,
so nothing is lost so far.
It's still in the making,
and we are actively searching for people contributing to this,
and if our community understood,
and this is I think what this panel definitely had for,
is that there is still room for improvements,
then this is something which is,
the solar effects, that's what I think.
So as you said, that the people from their commissioner
are who, because there will be
some agency that will define this to us,
so people from this planned agency,
or who was there and saw that some people are very worried about
this whole server itself.
So basically it's the person who is working in the BSI,
the sort of department, which might be in charge
of the Cyber Resilience Act in the implementation.
The thing is that the CIA itself,
was just really released by the end of last year,
so member states are still discussing
who ultimately will be market surveillance authority,
so it's not set in stone,
but it's likely that the BSI will be,
and ultimately the person who was there,
and Michael is also the person,
this whom I'm running the project together with CBI,
in order to figure out how this relationship looked like.
So basically, one could say the representatives
of the department that will be in charge was there,
and for this, it's a thing,
that's also sort of a very strong commitment
that market surveillance authorities do not only want
to work with manufacturers,
or that they have only in eye for the industry,
but they also go actively to our community
in order to learn about our demands or fears,
and I think that's something very valuable
that Michael showed up and not only listen,
but also actively to part in this Q&A session
and try to address those questions
and trying to take away some of the fears
that are in the room.
That I can imagine.
But so this was a successful era
and session in the EU and quality of what else happened there.
I think that it must have been not the only session there,
right? There were loads more.
And here do you were hanging around there the whole day?
Yeah, absolutely.
So it's always a intense experience.
I mean, we start at 10, 30 and at 7,
so that's quite a while.
And also I have to say that many people
stayed for the whole day in the room.
So obviously we had an interesting agenda
and often we also had to close the doors
since the room was so packed that we can't let everybody in.
So for all of you that couldn't see the talk,
they wanted to see there are also recordings
on the first and back side itself,
where you can watch all the talks
and also on FFE.org.
You find the news item in the blog post
where we also report about what happened.
I want to highlight in this podcast again,
a very practical talk we had,
which is on the mandatory B2B e-in voices
and which this means for software.
I think that was a very interesting talk
since it addresses a very practical hands-on question
that is basically coming to us,
which in the first place doesn't look like a free software problem,
but there are some strings attached to the free software community.
So that was a pretty hands-on talk,
I think this is also always nice to have.
Also we discussed in this like hands-on tool related topic,
a tool from the UBIN data protection board,
which is basically a compliance tool
where you can check how your website is in line with data protection laws
and this is also an open source tool.
So here we can see how UBIN institutions
also are made use of open source tools
in order to fulfill the obligations in order to help.
Companies out there are in this case like,
yeah, people who run a website.
Also I mean, which is very important for us,
in particular for the FSE is the discussion we have on the DNA
and the Apple litigation case.
So my colleague Lucas is working on basically
interoperability question when it comes to the App Store on iOS,
so Apple phones and tablets.
And here we run a legal activity against Apple
and that was in particular interesting
since there was a fire side chat with somebody
or with two people from the UBIN commission
that were giving insights in their daily work,
how they do this and yeah,
what questions arise when we talk about the gatekeeper issue,
device neutrality topics and how we legally try to enforce this
together with the commission to make sure that on the Apple,
as device is this in the future possible
to, for example, also install the F-Troid app store
and by that you will be able to also get apps.
There are not coming from this Apple universe
but can be free software from the F-Troid store, for example.
So a very interesting legal case.
I think it will be somehow also covered in this podcast episode
since there will be some results one day
and we hope to be able to safeguard device neutrality business.
And yeah, that was also in particular,
since people from the UBIN commission showed up again
I think a sign that's European institutions
that institutions in general do take care of what we do
that they follow our arguments even more
and that they also even more up to also join these kind of like community events
like the first them and explain their work towards this community
and I think that's also a very strong statement
from the commission to join these fireside chat.
Where you know it's the first them,
people are very critical to people
and they sometimes ask questions that are not so nice
for institution people or decision makers,
but they show up, they took the questions
and that's I think something we should also value
that more and more people from the institutions
are coming on a week and to explain their work
and that's also a good result of our work at check.
Yeah, it makes them more approachable, right?
I just thought that this was like,
it's actually a chance to engage with policy makers
and to talk about your fears and your thoughts
and bring them to their attention.
Absolutely, and I do believe a dialogue is always better
to have with the people we want to basically address
with our demands, so it's better to talk with them
instead of over them and for this I think it's also underlying
how important this event is and that they see
that it is an important event for them
to go there and to meet these kind of stakeholders
so that they are not only meeting the industry
in the hidden hotel during the week,
but that they also actively go on a Saturday
to the university to an event
which is absolutely crazy
and if you have there for the very first time
in particular, if you are living in the process but
it's the complete opposite of what you normally see
how people advocate for something
and that they do the step that something
really valued a lot.
Okay, I can't imagine, I think that's a very nice of them
and it shows a lot of commitment to the community.
This is a short break for our own cause.
Thank you for listening to this afternoon podcast.
Working for software freedom and producing podcasts,
cost money.
Please consider supporting us with a donation
on the ffs.org slash donate at the show notes.
So this was the legal and policy too.
That room.
But I remember we had two.
Yes.
We did have another one.
It was one on Sunday.
Yeah.
It was the post funding.
Yeah, since this other day it's not enough of work.
I also decided to have no with some other organizations
to come up with a funding there from here.
For example, we worked with the sovereignty agency from Germany.
We worked with the Linux foundation, the prototype fund.
So people that are also already active in this sphere of funding.
We came together, I'd say,
mid last year and decided on the idea to propose a funding
that room.
We precisely discussed basically all questions that arise
from funding.
So for example, from whom do you want to take funding?
From whom not?
Is there a way how we can identify, for example,
very important projects or core infrastructure that we want to support?
How much money do we want to give them?
Is there some sort of communication or some sort of activity
to be more successful in fundraising, for example?
So there are many discussions on funds on funding on where
money should come from, and all of these discussions
happening here and there, but not like on one place.
And that's why we decided to come up with this dedicated funding
that room and I think that was also a huge success.
So also this room was pretty packed during the whole day.
And we had many, many submissions also in the first place.
So we had to be very picky on the talks we had.
And ultimately, but I think we came up with a very, very nice agenda
that addressed most of the topics that somehow arise
when we talk about funding.
And also the discussions after every talk show that there is really
in need for this discussion that there is a lot of expertise.
Also, that was very nice to see that many participants who
maybe had been rejected by their talk due to the nature of this very short date,
which we had basically just eight hours, where we discussed this topic.
But still in the room and sharing the expertise.
And that was pretty nice to see that it was not just like people talking
and sharing the experience from the stage, but that there was also a lot
of interaction with the people in the room that also not only ask questions,
but also added a lot of very useful information.
And for example, sources, so where you can look for money,
how to do this, they shared the experience.
And I think that was basically what the deaf room should look like, right?
So that there is a discussion ongoing that there is,
one could say, something starts there.
So I had a feeling that after this deaf room,
more and more people are now connected and can work together and collaborate on these questions.
So I would be very happy to see this deaf room again next year,
and maybe to see if there was already some sort of progress.
Or if there are some new questions, I mean,
we both also talked about the funding topic that we discussed.
I think two at this also go, go.
So there are also discussions ongoing, not only in the European Union,
but also in member states and globally,
how to invest in core infrastructure,
how to invest in digital to sovereignty,
but world plays free software and all of this.
And I think it's a good idea that our community is networking and collaborating on those questions in order to be able to influence these discussions happening on the European level.
Like this input from us,
because I do believe that our community is basically that one that can help in this debate a lot,
in order to identify who are the people that need money,
which are the projects that need support,
and which are the other projects where we could also say,
this is something that the market should invest,
and not us taxpayers money.
I think there are different sources we need to discuss,
we are managed to come from and it should always be private and public.
So in this, these are some questions that are not that easy
to discuss when it comes again to the needy query,
and here I think it's a good idea if we can up this idea as out of our community ourselves,
and point to the right project that needs support,
and discuss this also within our community,
how we do believe funding for the free software ecosystem should look like,
and what's good for us is community and what not.
And therefore this deaf room was super helpful.
It was also pretty hands on if you are a project and you struggle with finding money.
There are definitely talks, you should watch again,
also here these talks are all recorded.
So you can go on the first step side,
channel to the deaf room, click the talk,
and you will find the recording of the talk.
So you can watch all of this again,
or I said, saying here we will also have a blog post,
and use the item on fissivee.org.
Where we report about this deaf room,
and where you can also find recordings and rewatch,
what's interesting for you.
And I will also link them in the show notes.
Yes.
Perfect.
Not all of the videos separately,
but the deaf room that you can go through the talk.
Exactly.
And then what's the recording?
Because otherwise it would be a bit too much.
Maybe I can attach also here,
a call to our community,
or to our listeners of this podcast episode.
So if you are working on the topic of funding,
or if you are interested in the topic of funding,
if you want to contribute with this debate,
you're also free to reach out to me directly,
or to contact at fissivee.org.
So we are still in the very early phase,
I'd say, of this debate,
and it will keep us busy,
I do believe for the next term.
So basically for the next five years,
you should debate,
we are discussing,
you will stick a one-stack,
we are discussing core infrastructure,
we are discussing innovation in Europe,
the new digital program will be coming up into years
where there might be potential sources for funding.
So the discussion is just about to start,
so if you want to take part in this discussion,
if you have ideas,
if you have points,
or if you also have experience,
which is a big interest for us,
and if you are free to reach out to us.
That one's a good idea to get all of us,
if you could together,
and to start with this discussion,
also outside of Boston.
But what was the best thing that happened in this,
of course,
funding,
deaf room for you,
like what really stood out for you?
What was the something I better to ask us to hire to name?
So I don't want to pick a specific talk,
but what I really liked was,
what I already said,
that there was a lot of interaction in the deaf room.
So, and that there was basically participants,
and speakers have been on eye level,
and it had been a very good exchange.
I do believe that also speakers took some sort of information
that was new to them away from this deaf room,
and that's something which is really good.
And I do believe also that this deaf room helped a lot,
and in order to bring people together,
to see who else is working on this topic,
and to be able to network with those people,
and to be able to collaborate in the future,
and that's,
I think,
the biggest result of this deaf room,
and yeah,
bringing people together,
and pointing to it,
and giving it the importance with,
like also a dedicated deaf room,
showed that there is the need to discuss this,
that there is a need from the community,
and people are already working on this,
but that they are not,
well, network together,
but this room definitely had to,
to create this,
get people closer together,
absolutely.
And that was,
that was basically the best outcome for me,
however,
as said,
so there is definitely something,
which is super interesting,
so for me,
in particular,
the question on combining public and private efforts,
so how we can bring together the market,
and the taxpayers in order to support,
free software ecosystem,
that's one of the most interesting questions for me,
because I do believe,
it should not only be taxpayers money,
but also private money,
and there,
it's definitely a question,
how can we push the market,
how can we,
in particular, push those who benefit from,
feel software,
but don't contribute back,
how can we push them,
and the very interesting part here is,
that we can even combine this,
we can combine this debate,
with the cyber resilience act,
as we dare have these roles of the Stuart and manufacturer,
and we want the manufacturer supporting the Stuart,
so you can see that we,
with this topic,
also,
and using other files to create awareness about this topic,
and this topic of funding is discussed in many debates,
but it's not that there is,
this one funding debate happening in Europe,
at the moment,
it's still a lot of peace work,
and I do believe that this,
that we just address these questions,
we've already helped us to showcase,
that there's not this one single question in this,
niche debate,
but that there's ongoing overall funding debate,
which is basically asking for public and private money,
for innovation,
for core infrastructure,
and for digital digital sovereignty,
and to come up with one answer to this,
needs collaboration,
it needs working together,
and understanding in which niche's people are working on this topic,
in order to have shared approach,
so to say,
to the funding question,
and that we can also use the niche debates
to show that there are other debates
ongoing in other files as well.
Yeah,
I would like to pick out the word,
as you mentioned,
working together, creating that book,
and also highlight the part
that we at FSAFE took a lot of time
to go through all of those talks,
to like,
put energy in there and to create those rooms
for the whole community to network into you,
get together,
but we also depend on your support.
So please consider supporting us with the nation,
and you can find information on the FSAFE.org slash donate,
as we can only continue our work for free software here support.
This is something that I would like to highlight
during the context of working,
because I was just thinking,
during the whole time I thought,
oh my god,
Alex has spent a lot of time
and effort to create those rooms,
and I think this is something
that the whole community benefited by, you know?
I hope so, I hope so, and I had a feeling.
Yeah.
And I also have to add,
as the normally,
not only the preparation of the FSAFE,
it's very time consuming,
but also the days afterwards,
or even the weeks afterwards.
So since you normally run into so many people during FSAFE,
and you start so many short chats
where you agree on,
oh we need to continue this conversation,
but it's for them,
you know, I have to run to the next meeting,
and you collect even addresses,
and a lot of things,
and several communication networks,
and I'm still struggling,
some may it's that I still have to send.
So it's not only what's happening that day,
it's one part is the preparation,
the another part is being there for two days,
more than nine hours in those deaf rooms,
without any sunlight.
And then the part which comes afterwards,
and at one day,
we will start again preparing the next FSAFE,
so it's basically FSAFE keeps us busy for the whole year,
one could say,
and that I can do my work,
in order to realize these kind of deaf rooms,
but in order to follow up,
so it's not just like,
that we do these deaf rooms for fun.
We also want to have impact business,
and this needs follow up,
and this needs a lot of time.
And as said,
for example, with the funding thing,
we are just starting,
to be able to do this,
and I say,
as a whole community,
and bringing these people together,
also takes time,
it needs energy,
finding common ground,
see where we can work together,
and this needs a lot of time,
resources,
and if you donate to us,
you make this work possible,
you make our sites for funding possible,
and then also,
one day we'll benefit you,
if you,
for example,
a developer,
and maybe we'll get funds for your project in the future.
Perfect.
I would like to take this as a closing word,
because we,
exceeded a bit of our time,
11,
but I had a very fine chat with you.
Thank you so much,
Alex,
for making this possible.
Thank you so much for your work,
on free software,
and advocating for free software in the European Union.
I think this is a really valuable work,
and I really appreciate working with you together,
thank you.
Thank you so much.
This was the software freedom podcast.
If you like this episode,
please recommend it to your friends,
and write it.
Stay tuned for more inspiring conversations,
that explore the importance of software freedom,
and its impact on our digital life.
This podcast is presented to you by the free software foundation Europe.
We are a charity that works on promoting software freedom.
If you like our work,
please consider supporting us as a donation.
You find more information on the FSE.org slash donate.
Thank you so much for your support,
and until next time,
bye-bye.